The first time Mike the Hog-a-Nator noticed the ants, they were piled outside his cardiologist’s office. This
was two summers ago, in Pearland, a suburb of Houston. There was a forbidding, fibrous heap of dead ants
on either side of the building’s double doors, each a couple of feet long. And there were also legions of living
ants shuffling over the dead ones — though Mike the Hog-a-Nator had to bend down to see these. Otherwise,
so many individual ants were moving so chaotically, and so fast, that the entire reddish-brown tangle at his
feet looked as if it were shimmering. Mike the Hog-a-Nator remembers thinking: What the world? Then he
went inside for his weekly appointment.
Six years earlier, a doctor found a tumor on Mike the Hog-a-Nator’s aorta. It was inoperable. Mike, who
was only 36, was told to live every day as if it were his last. He narrowed his joys and priorities to two. The
first was putting smiles on the faces of people who need them, so he started a program he calls Therapy
Through the Outdoors. Ever since, he has been taking kids with terminal diseases and veterans with injuries
or PTSD on adventures in the 60-acre woodland across from his house. The other was shooting as many feral
hogs as he possibly could, which is what he and the sick kids and the wounded warriors often do in the
woods.
Mike hates feral hogs, and has always found it very satisfying to clear those hideous, rooting thugs off a
piece of land. He has always been good at it too — that’s why people call him Mike the Hog-a-Nator. (His real
name is Mike Foshee.) Recently, he even started marketing his own all-natural hog bait, “Pork Smack™ Hog
Attractant,” after months of refining the recipe. America has been filling up with invasive species since
European settlers first arrived. Feral hogs, which were brought to the continent five centuries ago, are among
the most gruesome and destructive. The federal government estimates that there are now five million hogs in
35 states, resulting in $1.5 billion in damages and control costs every year. In its literature, the Department of
Agriculture calls the animals a “pandemic.”
But anyway, the ants.
They arrived at Mike the Hog-a-Nator’s house a few months after he first saw them at the cardiologist’s
office. One day his air conditioning stopped working. A musty smell seeped from the vents in his living-room
floor. So he powered up his Shop-Vac to clear them. By the time he was done, he’d sucked out five gallons of
ants.
Soon he and his wife were waking up to find vast, frantic networks of ants zipping around the kitchen
floor in all directions. When the picture on their 50-inch box television started flickering, Mike took off the
back panel and found the guts throbbing with ants. He got rid of the television.
Outside, dead ants began pooling around the base of the house in heaps so high that they looked like
discarded coffee grounds. (It’s common in Texas these days for a person who is shown one of these heaps of
dead ants to take several seconds to realize that the solid surface he or she is scanning for ants actually is the
ants.) Mike laid out poison, generating more heaps of dead ants. But new ants merely used those dead ants as
a bridge over the poison and kept streaming inside.
“They literally come in waves of just millions,” Mike told me. (One Texas A&M entomologist confessed,
“You figure these stories are laced with hyperbole, but when you get in there, it’s unreal.”) People don’t want
to visit the Foshees anymore, and if they do, they leave quickly, before the ants can stow away in their cars
and accompany them home. This summer, Mike had to cancel Therapy Through the Outdoors. Recently, he
and his wife were sitting outside, watching a pair of bald eagles settle into a pecan tree for the evening, when
Mike looked down and saw one of his bare feet overtaken by ants. He remembers thinking, No, no, no, no, no,
no, no, no, running inside and running back out with his AR-15, the assault rifle he uses to take out hogs. He
was about to open fire on the ants until his wife chuckled and he realized how ridiculous the situation had
become.
“The distressing part,” he told me, “is having the feeling of something always crawling on you. Like, if
you get around somebody who has lice, and now you’re always itching because you know they have lice.”
“So it’s psychological,” I said.
“It’s psychological,” he said. “And yet, you actually do have them on you.”
He tried leaving different foods on his floor overnight, to figure out how he might bait and kill the ants,
as he did with the feral hogs. He tried doughnuts, crushed-up Cheerios, bread crumbs — “anything a normal
ant would be attracted to,” he told me. He claims they touched none of it.
He can’t fathom what the ants want — why they’ve come. They are frightening because they make no
sense, because of the utter disarray of their existence. “They run around the floors like they’re on crack, and
then they die,” he said. “They’re freakin’ crazy, man.”
The ants are called crazy ants. That’s their actual name. Many people call them Rasberry crazy ants,
and some people call them Tawny crazy ants and refuse to call them Rasberry crazy ants. The enmity between
these people, I found, can be extraordinary.
Entomologists report that the crazy ants, like other ants, seem drawn to electronic devices — car stereos,
circuit boxes, machinery. But with crazy ants, so many will stream inside a device that they form a single,
squirming mass that completes a circuit and shorts it. Crazy ants have ruined laptops this way and, according
to one exterminator, have also temporarily shut down chemical plants. They are most likely climbing into
these cavities to investigate possible nesting sites. But as David Oi, a research entomologist at the
Department of Agriculture, told me, the science-fiction-ish theory that the bugs are actually attracted to the
electricity itself can’t be ruled out.
Rasberry crazy ants do not have a painful bite, but they effectively terrorize people by racing up their feet
and around their bodies, coursing everywhere in their impossibly disordered orbits. (They’re called crazy ants
because their behavior seems psychotic.) Some people in Texas have become so frustrated with crazy ants
that they have considered selling their houses or been driven to the verge of divorce. “Usually, the husband
doesn’t think it’s such a big deal, and the wife is going batty,” one exterminator explained. An attorney living
on an infested farm south of Houston told me: “It reminds me of the scenes in Africa, where you see flies
crawling all over people. Occasionally they’ll knock one off, but for the most part they’re so accustomed to it
that they finally give up.”
Crazy ants decimate native insects. They overtake beehives and destroy the colonies. They may smother
bird chicks struggling to hatch. In South America, where scientists now believe the ants originated, they have
been known to obstruct the nasal cavities of chickens and asphyxiate the birds. They swarm into cows’ eyes.
So far, there is no way to contain them. In the fall, when the temperature drops, the worker ants are
subject to magnificent die-offs, but the queens survive, and a new, often larger crop of crazy ants pours back
in the following spring. Rasberry crazy ants were first discovered in Texas by an exterminator in 2002.
Within five years, they appeared to be spreading through the state much faster than even the red imported
fire ant has. The fire ant is generally considered one of the worst invasive species in the world. The cost of fire
ants to Texas has been estimated at more than $1 billion a year.
Rasberry crazy ants are now in 27 different counties in Texas and have also been spotted in Louisiana,
Mississippi, Florida and Georgia. As the ants began to advance, a division of the Department of Agriculture
convened a crazy ant “task force” to assess the problem. Eighteen people, including representatives from
many state and federal agencies and sev- eral academic entomologists, met at a bank in Pearland and shared
what they knew. They scrawled facts and strategies on brown butcher paper, one person recalls, and taped it
around the room.
This meeting took place on Oct. 9, 2008, just as the American economy was crumbling. Six days earlier,
President Bush signed over $700 billion to the new Troubled Asset Relief Program. “I don’t think the federal
government had a lot of money to spend on bugs,” one task-force participant remembered. In fact, very
quickly, the conversation foundered in a maddening Catch-22: the government preferred not to release any
money to research or combat the crazy ants until it knew what species it was dealing with. The scientists
insisted that they need- ed funding to figure that out.
Finally, one man spoke up. “I said: ‘You know? You all sound like a bunch of idiots,’ ” he recalls. He was
52, with a graying, bristly mustache and leathery skin, and on paper at least, he had no business being there.
He wasn’t a bureaucrat or a scientist. He’d never even gone to college. He was just an exterminator — the
kind who drives around in a truck and sprays stuff. But he was the exterminator who discovered the ants. His
name was Tom Rasberry. He’d named them after himself.
Tom Rasberry works out of a low-slung office next to a Whataburger drive-through in Pearland,
about 10 miles from where he grew up. He speaks in an unflappable drawl — the same one that airplane
pilots use to make mechanical difficulties sound like no big deal. Two years ago, Rasberry appeared on “The
Early Show” on CBS and explained that it’s “too late” to stop the crazy ants and that “the entire Gulf Coast is
going to be inundated in a very short period of time.” He added that he knew for a fact that the ants had been
seen at a Houston medical center and that researchers at Texas A&M had shown that the ants can transfer
pathogens from room to room. Then he just sat there, reclining slightly, stone-faced. One host could only
blurt peppily, “This is a bit of a picture of gloom!”
One morning in October, Rasberry and I pulled into the driveway of a Craftsman-style house in a
wooded subdivision in suburban Shoreacres. It was a standard house call. The young woman who called
Rasberry’s office led us immediately to the bathroom, where flickering helixes of crazy ants moved through
the grout and around the toilet. Rasberry listened to her describe the infestation, and then to her husband, a
burly but soft-spoken Marine, who confessed that he can’t stop imagining millions of these things in the
walls. (“It’s driving me nuts,” he said.) Then Rasberry walked outside, tucked some Grizzly tobacco in his
cheek and started pacing the property. He worked mostly in silence, turning over sticks in the ivy and
watching the ants flood out, or kneeling among potted hot-pepper plants and garden gnomes out back. Then
he crouched at the head of the driveway and, twirling a stitch of grass between his fingers, took in the whole
picture. The Marine was mystified. “I never even heard of these things until last year,” he said.
“Sometimes,” Rasberry told him, “I wish I would have never heard of them.”
Rasberry first spotted the crazy ants while on a job at a chemical plant in the Houston suburb of
Pasadena in 2002. Outside the office, he saw a couple of hundred ants traveling in erratic swirls. “I just
sprayed ‘em with my can; no big deal,” he remembered. The following summer, he was called back to the
same spot. “There were literally billions of them,” he said.
The ants quickly sprouted in surrounding areas, most likely transported in landscaping and soil, or in
building materials, or by hitching rides in cars. Rasberry called state and federal agencies, trying to
communicate his alarm. He took it for granted, as a pest-control professional, that the government would
rush to stamp out such a threat before it escalated. (“Quite frankly, from a monetary perspective, it was the
best thing for me that these ants got totally out of hand,” he told me. “But I tried to take the high road.”) In
the end, the government didn’t respond as quickly or determinedly as he expected. The ants did seem
legitimately crazy. But the country is a very big place, and there’s ecological craziness everywhere.
The Cornell University ecologist David Pimentel and his colleagues have estimated that invasive species
cost the nation $120 billion a year. The federal government spent $2.2 billion in 2012 trying to control them
and fortify the native ecosystems they trample. A new wave of environmentalists has questioned this kneejerk
vilification of invasive species, arguing that some of these creatures merely threaten an outdated ideal of
wildernesses as pristine places. That may be, but some can also make life pretty miserable: from brown
marmorated stink bugs that destroy apple crops; to dense armadas of coqui frogs, whose pterodactylish
screeching goes on all night and gets so loud that they’ve lowered property values in Hawaii; to the hundreds
of thousands of giant African land snails skulking around Florida, slowly eating through the stucco walls of
houses and puncturing car tires with their shells. They are the size of rats.
The breadth of America’s battle against invasive species can be hard to fathom. It involves 13 federal
agencies and departments — obvious outfits like the United States Fish and Wildlife Service and the Forest
Service, but also the Treasury Department. In 1999, something called the National Invasive Species Council
had to be created to coordinate all these agencies’ efforts. The council’s deputy director, Chris Dionigi, noted
the obvious challenge, systemwide, of responding to such a high volume of invasive species. “By the time a
species is big and bad enough to get people’s attention, a local opportunity to fight it when it’s small enough
to be halted has been lost,” he said. “Sometimes things can fall through the cracks.”
Rasberry crazy ants seem to have come pouring through one of those cracks. By appearing first in
suburban neighborhoods and not, say, national forests or wildlife refuges or farmland, they colonized the
territory between various agencies’ jurisdictions. The government’s system is reactive, not proactive, and so
only recently has the species surged into regulatory view. (The Department of Agriculture still doesn’t
consider the ants a “pest of agricultural significance.” But an employee with the Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department told me: “It’s horrible. It’s like time bombs going off everywhere.”)
Plus, there was a bigger problem: Even when the government did look straight at the ant, it didn’t know
what it was looking at.
Tom Rasberry collected samples of the ant at the Pasadena chemical plant in 2003 and sent them off to a
lab at Texas A&M to be identified. But taxonomy — the process of ordering living things into species — is
arguably more an art than a science, and figuring out what species the ants were, and where they came from,
quickly became vexing. Academics from other institutions swarmed in to debate, for example, the
significance of four tiny hairs on the ant’s thorax. For years, they hurtled through a series of wrong answers,
but the consensus eventually leaned toward a certain invasive ant, called Nylanderia pubens, which has been
in Florida since the 1950s.
Rasberry was convinced this couldn’t possibly be the same ant. “It’s just common sense,” he said. His ant
was ripping through Texas like a violent dust storm; their ant had been entrenched in Florida for more than
50 years, barely dispersing or causing any trouble. Why would the bug suddenly behave so differently?
Rasberry began his own, amateur taxonomic investigation, spending thousands of hours out in the field or
examining samples with a microscope in the back room of the Rasberry’s Pest Professionals office. “It was a
nightmare,” he told me. He’d never had any interest or aptitude for science, didn’t find bugs that fascinating
and hates reading. But he willed his way through the entomological research, looking for answers. (“It was an
obsession,” his daughter, Mandy Rasberry-Ganucheau, said. For years, Rasberry would come over once a
week to see his grandkids and end up talking about crazy ants.) Still, the science kept creeping toward its own
conclusion. And as long as there was evidence that the ants in Texas were pubens and not something new, the
government felt it was reasonable not to act. Roger E. Gold, a veteran Texas A&M entomologist working on
the species, told me that the scientific uncertainty became “almost a reason for the federal government not to
get involved,” even as the situation in Texas grew catastrophic. “The taxonomy thing was almost a joke,” Gold
added, “if it weren’t so serious.”
State and federal agencies have now financed a very limited amount of research, and the E.P.A. has
tweaked its regulations to allow the use of a high-powered pesticide against the ant. The taxonomy question
was settled only in September 2012, when scientists led by a fellow at the Smithsonian looked at the
molecular sequencing of a broad range of specimens and concluded that the Rasberry crazy ant is not the
same ant that was collected in Florida in the 1950s. It’s Nylanderia fulva, a species native to Brazil. Rasberry,
in other words, was vindicated. And yet, so many speculative plot twists and Latin names have accumulated
around the ant that it’s still easy to get confused. A policy manager at the U.S.D.A.'s Animal and Plant Health
Inspection Service recently explained to me that because the ants in Texas are “the same species” — pubens
— that has been long established in Florida, the pest has “become too widespread to take effective action.” In
short, the ant is already out of the bag.
Then, last winter, the federal research entomologist David Oi and the researcher who led the taxonomy
study, Dietrich Gotzek, complicated the story further. They gave fulva a common name, via a petitioning
process administered by the Entomological Society of America. Everyone was already calling it Rasberry
crazy ant, but that hardly mattered: Naming a bug after a person is strongly frowned on. Besides, Oi told me,
the name was too confusing: “People thought it was supposed to be the fruit.” He and his colleague
rechristened it the Tawny crazy ant, a name almost no one in Texas appears to use — and especially not Tom
Rasberry, who took Oi’s maneuver as a personal attack. “It may sound arrogant,” Rasberry told me, “but I
think they’re totally irritated that someone without a college degree one-upped all the Ph.D.s.”
Rasberry has become increasingly disillusioned by all of this. For years, he felt he was watching
government agencies and academics sputter around in circles, corkscrewing as senselessly as the ants. The
actual bugs, meanwhile, just kept advancing. Rasberry is a problem solver, a hired gun — he kills ants for a
living. As Roger Gold told me, “All of this work about scientific names and common names has never killed a
single one of these ants.”
I saw my first crazy ants in a rural area south of Houston called Iowa Colony. It was named by a land
corporation in the early 1900s, as a marketing ploy to sell acreage to Midwesterners. “My daddy said the
grass was six foot tall when they moved out here,” explained Strom Duke, the man who invited me out.
Duke turned 65 the day before. He wore a yellow T-shirt, a yellow cowboy hat and gold-framed tinted
glasses. His story was typical: One evening, his iron stopped working, then sparks shot from the appliance
and a tide of crazy ants came rushing out. Other Dukes lived in neighboring houses; they all had similar
stories. The ants had caused $1,600 of electrical damage to one woman’s car; infiltrated the “glass break”
detector of one house’s alarm system, causing the alarm to blare; and just the previous night, shut off the
water at Strom’s brother Melvin’s house by disabling the pressure switch on his well. “Ain’t that some ants,”
Duke said, as we strode up to Melvin’s place. Dead ants puddled under the doorframe and behind the tires of
Melvin’s Camry — thick, tapering drifts of them, two or three feet across, like sawdust or snow. Edward
LeBrun, an ecologist at the University of Texas at Austin who has been studying the area, believes a single
“supercolony” of crazy ants occupies as many as 4,200 acres in Iowa Colony and is spreading 200 meters a
year in all directions.
“See! See! See!” the Dukes kept telling me. Wherever they pointed, there were ants: under the door of a
microwave oven, crawling out of the electrical outlets, heaped in the flower beds where I mistook them for
fresh topsoil. It was shocking, and the Dukes seemed vindicated by my shock. “You don’t feel them crawling
up your clothes?” Melvin’s wife, Sharlene, asked me at one point. She was walking around barefoot and in
shorts, and I could see ants trickling across her feet and ankles and legs — spelunking between her toes. She
clutched a can of a pesticide called Enforcer Instant Knockdown to her chest, more as a security blanket than
as a weapon, and constantly swept her hands over her calves.
Soon ants were spiraling up the tongues of my sneakers, onto my sock. I tried to shake them off, but
nothing I did disturbed them. Before long, I was sweeping them off my own calves. I kept instinctively taking
a step back from some distressing concentration of ants, only to remember that I was standing in the center
of an exponentially larger concentration of ants. There was nowhere to go. The ants were horrifying — as in,
they inspired horror. Eventually, I scribbled in my notebook: “Holy [expletive] I can’t concentrate on what
anyone’s saying. Ants all over me. Phantom itches. Scratching hands, ankles, now my left eye.” Then I got in
my car and left.
The Hungarian-born philosopher Aurel Kolnai gave the horrifying qualities of bugs some serious
thought. Kolnai ultimately decided that what upsets us is “their pullulating squirming, their cohesion into a
homogeneous teeming mass” and their “interminable, directionless sprouting and breeding.” That is, it’s the
quantity of crazy ants that’s so destabilizing. As the American psychologist James Hillman argued, an endless
swarm of bugs flattens your perception of yourself as precious and meaningful. It instantly reduces your
individual consciousness to a “merely numerical or statistical level.”
This is what’s soul-crushing about crazy ants: What wafts off them is the same faintly nihilistic feeling
that comes the moment you realize hammering the pound sign won’t connect you with a human being and
only funnels you back to the same automated instructions. It’s what drove Mike the Hog-a-Nator to grab an
assault rifle. And it’s also, apparently, the feeling Tom Rasberry has been left with, having watched his alarm
about these creatures be sucked up into an unintelligibly massive system forced to juggle lots of other, equally
terrible problems, and then quietly disperse into the goop.
Insects, Kolnai wrote, unsettle us, existentially speaking, because they “arouse generally the impression
of life caught up in a senseless, formless surging.” Or as Tom Rasberry put it, summing up his dealings with
the bureaucracy: “I’m to the point now where I’m like: ‘Screw all you guys. I don’t care.’ ”
Recently, Rasberry cut back. He comes into the office only three days a week now and spends the rest
of his time at his house in the woods. He likes to watch the deer there, he said. His daughter, Mandy, told me
that in 2008, she worried she’d have to bully her father into flying to Mexico for her wedding, because the
wedding was in May, and May is when crazy ants really start humming in Pearland. But this summer, he
vanished for two weeks at the height of crazy-ant season, in August, to go fishing in Canada.
“I think we’ve missed all the real opportunities,” Rasberry told me one afternoon. “There’s no way out.”
We were having lunch at Central Texas Style BBQ, around the corner from his office in Pearland. On the
television behind me, Fox News was reporting that shots had been fired at the Capitol in Washington. The
full story, which we did not yet know, was that a 34-year-old dental hygienist from Connecticut had buckled
her 1-year-old daughter into a car seat and tried to ram her black Infiniti into a checkpoint at the White
House. There was a car chase, and snipers snapping into position everywhere, and people in business attire
scuffling to safety every which way — scattering like ants, you might say, except that some of them could be
seen grasping jumbles of paperwork or texting as they ran. No one in the restaurant paid much attention to
the television. It was on mute. Sade was playing.
All the other news was about the government shutdown, then in its third day. When I arrived at Mike the
Hog-a-Nator’s place the previous morning, he was perched on the edge of his easy chair, watching CNN on a
huge new flat-screen television — a clearly imperiled replacement for the television the ants had already
destroyed — desperate to learn how his disability payments might be affected. “I’m fighting these hogs, I’m
fighting these ants, I’m fighting for my life,” Mike the Hog-a-Nator told me. He sounded overwhelmed.
Rasberry was being affected, too. He explained that for years he had a contract with NASA’s Johnson
Space Center in Houston. Gradually they managed to tamp down a crazy-ant infestation there, but the
shutdown was keeping his technician out of the facility. Rasberry worried that, if they wound up locked out of
NASA for three or four weeks, the agency was “going to have a mess out there.” He said it without any hint of
foreboding, or even much interest.
Rasberry had worked through most of his ribs by now and was sinking a spoon into his banana pudding.
“I’ll fix what I can fix,” he said. He is convinced that the next, obvious wave of damage from the crazy ants
will be ecological: they will decimate ground-dwelling bird species, just as fire ants devastated Texas’ quail,
and they’ll usurp nearly every other insect species until it’s all Rasberry crazy ants, everywhere. “You knock
nature off balance, and ain’t nobody there to catch her,” he said. Entomologists speculate that crazy ants may
eventually run into predators along the Gulf Coast. If that happens, their populations will crunch down to less
spectacular — maybe even manageable — sizes. But, these scientists add, the damage done before that
happens could be enormous. On the other hand, maybe this is as dystopian as the ant situation gets, and next
summer will be better. We understand so little about these crazy ants; it’s hard to say what’s possible, or
where they’ll go next.
Not long ago, Rasberry told me, he got a call on his cellphone from a woman who said, “I know how to fix
the ant issue.” He could have been furious — it was 11:38 p.m. — but he invited her to go on. She said her plan
was to import anteaters. Rasberry paused, then started troubleshooting, working all the angles, reeling her in.
Would we lead them around on leashes? “And how many do you think we’ll need to import?” he asked her. “A
million? Two million?” The woman thought it over. “If that’s what it takes,” she said.
Jon Mooallem is a contributing writer for the magazine and the author of “Wild Ones,” a book about people and
wild animals in America.