The most exuberant football rally at the University of Mississippi last year occurred four days after the season ended, when the school’s chancellor, Robert Khayat, announced the hiring of a new head football coach. A cheering overflow crowd at the school’s Center for the Performing Arts welcomed Houston Nutt, whom the university had somehow lured to Oxford from the Cotton Bowl-bound Arkansas Razorbacks (who had defeated Ole Miss, as the university is nicknamed, 44–8).

For Ole Miss, a relatively small public school in a poor state, a seven-and-a-half-million-dollar deal (as was reportedly given to Nutt) seemed an implausible splurge, and some sensed the hand of a private benefactor. Khayat acknowledged as much in his opening remarks, pronouncing himself “profoundly grateful to Dick Scruggs,” whose jet had been used as a shuttle during negotiations. Scruggs was arguably the most successful tort lawyer in America, and a deeply interested Ole Miss football fan. Dickie, as he was called, even by those who’d never met him, hated to lose; whenever an Ole Miss coaching change was rumored, fans tracked Scruggs’s plane on the Internet, for hints about where the school was looking. If Houston Nutt needed a deal sweetener, Dickie Scruggs, the man who took down Big Tobacco without conducting a single trial, probably had something to do with providing it.

But Robert Khayat was grateful to Scruggs for other reasons, too. Khayat became chancellor in 1995, with the mission of liberating Ole Miss from its past—a perilous ambition at a place where the past was so insistently present. Into the nineteen-sixties, Ole Miss embodied an idealized antebellum South. There were plenty of black people on campus, but they were caring for the immaculate green—the magnolia-lined Grove—or serving the sons and daughters of the state’s white establishment in their Greek-revival sorority and fraternity houses. The school’s nickname was itself a slave term for the mistress of a plantation. Students dressed for games as if going to church, and cheerleaders tossed bundles of Rebel flags into the stands before the start of each game as the band played a rousing version of “Dixie.”

When, in 1962, the federal government forced the enrollment of the first black student at the university, James Meredith, Ole Miss became a national symbol of white Southern resistance to the civil-rights movement. The U.S. Marshals accompanying Meredith were pelted with rocks and bottles, and, eventually, were targets of sniper fire. Two people were killed, and more than three hundred injured, before federal troops ended the riots. Burke Marshall, the head of the civil-rights division of the Kennedy Justice Department, called the episode “the final gasp of the Civil War.”

By the time Khayat became chancellor, the school’s endowment and enrollment had seriously declined. Khayat aggressively raised funds, cultivated allies in the academic establishment, and went to work on the school’s image. Rebel flags largely disappeared from the football stands, “Dixie” was downplayed, and the school’s mascot—Colonel Reb—was banished from the playing field. In thirteen years under Khayat, the school’s endowment has quintupled, enrollment has increased by about fifty per cent, and, along with the old statue of the Confederate soldier, a bronze sculpture commemorating James Meredith now holds an honored place on the campus.

The transformation at Ole Miss aroused a good deal of opposition, and would not have happened without support from key alumni, among the most important of whom was Dickie Scruggs. Although he is the brother-in-law of the former Republican Senator Trent Lott—the two men’s wives are sisters—Scruggs, who is sixty-one, is a staunch Democrat, and shares Khayat’s progressive vision for the school. A few years after Scruggs hit his first litigation jackpot, in 1993, taking on asbestos companies, he asked Khayat what he could do for the university. Khayat, who is seventy, had known Scruggs for most of his life. He had been his ninth-grade homeroom teacher in Pascagoula, and was on the faculty at Ole Miss Law School when Scruggs was a student there. The Chancellor told Scruggs that faculty salaries in the College of Liberal Arts were pitifully low, and Scruggs immediately made a twenty-five-million-dollar pledge. After his tobacco victory, in 1997, he coaxed his partner in that effort, an Ole Miss alum named David Nutt, to expand his own contribution. Ole Miss professors have since received several generous pay increases. In 2005, the music building, across from the Performing Arts Center, was renamed Scruggs Hall.

Scruggs was not present in November when Khayat publicly thanked him for his help in the coaching search. That morning, a federal grand jury in Oxford returned an indictment charging Scruggs, his son, Zach, and three other men with conspiring to offer a fifty-thousand-dollar bribe to a judge in Calhoun City. That afternoon, Scruggs was fingerprinted, processed, and arraigned.

The reaction to the indictment was incredulity. Scruggs had achieved rare standing among trial lawyers—as a visionary, whose extravagant fee awards allowed him to discount, with some credibility, money as his prime motivation. He was said to have scored a billion-dollar fee in the tobacco case. Why would he bother with a tawdry little bribery scam? Some speculated that the Bush Justice Department was trying to eliminate a prominent Democratic donor—invitations to a Hillary Clinton fund-raiser hosted by Scruggs, featuring an appearance by Bill Clinton, had recently been mailed. Others guessed that one of the indicted figures had been caught in a crime and was trying to win leniency by blaming Scruggs.

“I’m rarely at a loss for words, but I am at a complete loss about it,” said Jack Palladino, the San Francisco private investigator, who worked with Scruggs in the tobacco wars and came away an admirer. “It can’t be that he needed the money. I just don’t know what to say about it.”

Scruggs and his classmates at Ole Miss Law benefitted from a custom called “diploma privilege,” under which the school’s graduates were admitted to the Mississippi bar without having to pass the state exam. This practice (which ended in the nineteen-eighties) heightened the striking insularity of the Mississippi bar, a community of lawyers who mostly know one another, often because they were vetted by the same contracts professor during first-year law at Ole Miss. Seven of the nine justices on Mississippi’s Supreme Court attended Ole Miss Law School, as did Governor Haley Barbour and both of the state’s U.S. senators. Professional and personal relationships within this group are easily tangled. John Grisham, a friend of Scruggs’s, was a classmate of one of Scruggs’s prosecutors, U.S. Attorney Jim Greenlee (and they both sat through Professor Khayat’s class). Barbour, one of Scruggs’s fraternity brothers, was his adversary in the tobacco fight. Mississippi lawyers keep score, counting each other’s divorces and courtroom outcomes. Scruggs is not the only one of them to have been portrayed in the movies (“The Insider”), or to pilot his own jet, but he is the only lawyer notable for both distinctions. Many also insist that, although Scruggs is Mississippi’s most famous trial lawyer, he never really was a “trial” lawyer at all.

“I can assure you he hasn’t tried ten cases to verdict in his life,” Bill Reed, a Jackson attorney who is one of Scruggs’s closest friends, says. “But he is the master of the deal.”

Scruggs finished near the top of his class at Ole Miss Law, and was recruited into the Jackson law firm headed by one of his heroes—William Winter, the leader of the progressive wing of the state’s Democrats, and a future governor of the state. It was a terrible fit for Scruggs, as was his brief stay at the next big Jackson firm he tried. He was, by that time, married to Diane Thompson, a dentist’s daughter from Pascagoula, and he had served five years as a Navy pilot, flying A-6 attack planes from the decks of aircraft carriers. Within the disciplined hierarchy of the U.S. Navy, fighter-pilot culture is a thing apart, attracting the sort of personalities that warrant nicknames like Maverick. Scruggs is inclined to go his own way, and did. He moved to Pascagoula and opened a law office, in a former drugstore.

Pascagoula, on the eastern end of the Mississippi Gulf Coast, is an industrial town in the most cosmopolitan region of the state, and it was the nearest thing to a home town that Scruggs had known. He was born in 1946 in Brookhaven, up in the Piney Woods. (“We were so poor,” he likes to say, “that if I hadn’t been a boy, I wouldn’t have had anything to play with.”) His father, Tom Scruggs, left when Dickie was five, and his mother, Helen, eventually found work as a secretary at the Ingalls shipyard, in Pascagoula. Dickie lived there for four years before going to a military school in Georgia, on a scholarship. Now back in Pascagoula, where his mother still lived, Scruggs made his first fortune from the Ingalls shipyard.

In the nineteen-eighties, the growth field for tort lawyers was asbestos litigation. Inhalation of asbestos fibres had been linked to dire diseases, and lawyers, inevitably, had uncovered documentation that asbestos manufacturers knew of the material’s dangers for decades, without issuing warnings. Workplaces such as Ingalls, where asbestos was used in shipbuilding, produced whole populations of sick plaintiffs. Joining the rush of lawyers signing clients, Scruggs hit upon a competitive edge. Standard practice was to sign only clients with medical evidence of disease (such as an X-ray); Scruggs offered to pay the costs of a potential client’s visit to a clinic, and to accept the case if the tests returned positive. He soon had hundreds of clients.

The problem for Scruggs and other plaintiffs’ lawyers was getting their clients’ cases into court. In a product-liability case, the plaintiff had to prove that the manufacturer knew that asbestos was harmful or failed to properly investigate the danger, and that the plaintiff was exposed to the material and harmed by it. The litigation of one case could take years, and a deep-pocketed defendant could extend the process for as long as possible, and then settle the case just before trial. “It would typically cost more to litigate that one case than you could ever hope to recover for the total damage in the case,” says Danny Cupit, a Jackson lawyer who in 1982 helped win the first asbestos case in Mississippi, against Johns-Manville. By the time one case was resolved, hundreds more had been brought. “If it took you three years to get a case up for trial, and there were hundreds of cases being filed each year, the court could never keep up with that.”

Scruggs found that his cases were far down on the court docket, stacked behind those of Danny Cupit and other lawyers who had filed earlier. Again, he devised an edge. He persuaded a Pascagoula state-court judge, a populist who was sympathetic to the sick workers, to allow him to consolidate a mass of cases, and to split the traditional litigation process into two phases. The first phase would test only the general liability of the manufacturer: was asbestos harmful, did the manufacturer know it, and were plaintiffs exposed? If the answer to each question was yes, then a series of mini-trials would follow, determining the damages to be paid to the individual plaintiffs. This formulation raised the stakes tremendously for the defendant, because one bad verdict would multiply across all the cases.

“This is where the Scruggs approach was unique,” Cupit says. “The risk to a defendant of having liability imposed on several hundred cases was a risk that was more than that defendant wanted to reasonably bear. It created an atmosphere to settle the cases.” The asbestos companies caved.

Scruggs’s innovation helped to open the litigation floodgates in Mississippi, and the state became a principal battleground in the national political fight over tort reform. Mississippi has an elected judiciary, and, as settlement money rolled in, the plaintiffs bar began investing it in the campaigns of plaintiff-minded judges. Lawyers would then shop for friendly jurisdictions. Jefferson County (pop. 9,740) became so attractive to the tort bar that seventy-three mass-action lawsuits, representing more than three thousand plaintiffs, were filed there in 2000. The American Tort Reform Association calls such tortious hot spots “judicial hellholes.” Scruggs called them “magic jurisdictions.” In a panel discussion hosted by Prudential Financial in 2002, Scruggs explained the development:

The trial lawyers have established relationships with the judges that are elected; they’re State Court judges; they’re populists. They’ve got large populations of voters who are in on the deal, they’re getting their piece in many cases. And so, it’s a political force in their jurisdiction, and it’s almost impossible to get a fair trial if you’re a defendant in some of these places. . . . The cases are not won in the courtroom. They’re won on the back roads long before the case goes to trial. Any lawyer fresh out of law school can walk in there and win the case, so it doesn’t matter what the evidence or the law is. The major asbestos companies were bankrupted, and the tort bar turned to pharmaceutical companies, filing lawsuits on behalf of clients who were not always legitimately injured parties. “This is what I call the abusive phase,” Cupit says, “or what some others call killing the goose that laid the golden egg.” The U.S. Chamber of Commerce and big business began pouring money into the campaigns of industry-friendly judges, and into those of politicians who promised tort reform. Haley Barbour made the issue a priority after he was elected governor, in 2003. The Mississippi legislature passed his tort-reform program, which severely limited liability.
Scruggs did not join the Big Pharma frenzy. He prefers only “primary kills,” he said in a 2002 interview with the magazine Chief Executive. “I don’t want to get there after the antelope has been brought down.”

Scruggs began to formulate his own brand of litigation, entrepreneurial and boldly speculative, of which the actual practice of law was only one part. The strategic manipulation of politics and public opinion was just as important to this enterprise—“a three-legged stool,” as Scruggs described it to colleagues. By exerting pressure at key points, he could see to it that defenses collapsed and opponents settled without a jury ever having a say. He created a sort of floating legal syndicate, with changing players (only some of whom were lawyers) chosen as needed for a particular skill or connection.

The most important player in Scruggs’s informal syndicate was his law-school classmate Mike Moore, the attorney general of Mississippi. Moore was another Pascagoulan, a crusading prosecutor who was part of a team of young progressives swept into statewide office in 1988. Moore and Scruggs contrived a means of exploiting the asbestos issue to their mutual benefit. Moore, as the top legal officer of the state, hired Scruggs, on a contingency basis, to press the asbestos industry to pay for removal of the material from public places. Scruggs prevailed, and was paid several million dollars for his effort.

The asbestos model proved useful when Moore, early in his second term, went after the manufacturers of cigarettes. He had received a call from another Ole Miss Law classmate, Michael Lewis, an attorney in Clarksdale, who proposed that the State of Mississippi sue tobacco companies in order to recover the enormous Medicaid costs and other state costs spent on health care for sick smokers. Big Tobacco had for decades loomed as the unattainable prize for trial lawyers: despite the overwhelming evidence of the hazards of tobacco, plaintiffs had never won damages against the industry. Tobacco’s principal defense was “assumed risk”—the argument that, even if cigarettes did cause harm (an assertion the tobacco companies did not fully concede), smokers assumed all risk by deciding to smoke. That defense could not be used against a state, which had no choice in the matter of paying smokers’ Medicaid costs.

Moore deputized Scruggs to develop a Medicaid suit, which Moore filed in Pascagoula in May, 1994. (Scruggs later remarked that it was like having a chance to be the first man to scale Mt. Everest.) The suit’s premise was innovative, but more important was the contribution of two tobacco insiders, who guided Scruggs and Moore to the industry’s pressure points. The first was Merrell Williams, a former paralegal at a Kentucky law firm that had been hired by Brown & Williamson, the producer of Kool and Viceroy cigarettes, to review potentially incriminating internal documents. The material included evidence that the company had known of tobacco’s addictive and injurious effects for at least thirty years, and had hidden the information from the public. Williams clandestinely removed documents from the firm, and ultimately hid them at a friend’s house in Florida while he tried to find a way to bring the information to light. But the theft was soon discovered, and a judge ordered the material sealed and returned. Williams and his documents became untouchable (he vainly approached several attorneys and journalists), until he met Dickie Scruggs. Scruggs flew with him to Florida on his jet, and retrieved the purloined documents. Williams was out of work, and homeless; Scruggs moved him to the Gulf Coast, found him housing and a boat, and paid him thousands of dollars in what he called “loans.”

“Dick didn’t get where he got by asking permission,” one Scruggs ally said. “He got where he got by counting on asking for forgiveness, if he needed to.”

The second tobacco insider was Jeffrey Wigand, a former Brown & Williamson scientist who also had incriminating information, and who could serve as an interpreter of the Williams documents. But Wigand had signed a seemingly airtight confidentiality agreement after he took a buyout from the company. Scruggs offered Wigand his legal services without charge, and helped facilitate Wigand’s appearance in a controversial segment of the CBS broadcast “60 Minutes.”

Any evidence and testimony provided by Williams and Wigand in a trial would certainly be contested as hopelessly tainted, but, if the Scruggs formula succeeded, a trial would be avoided. Scruggs and Moore spent nearly two years travelling around the country, lobbying other state attorneys general to file their own tobacco lawsuits. The team also worked the corridors of Congress and the Clinton White House, trying to fashion a national tobacco settlement. The team had added other lawyers to the effort, but Scruggs was paying most of the bills, and by 1996 he was beginning to feel the strain.

“I was risking a career,” Moore recalls. “But he was risking all his money. And when I say ‘all his money,’ what people don’t know is, he put all his money in. I mean, all his money. Mortgaged his house. He was all in.”

Scruggs approached other members of the plaintiffs bar, offering a piece of the tobacco action in exchange for an advance investment to defray expenses. Few agreed. Finally, Scruggs made an irresistible offer to a prosperous Jackson asbestos attorney, David Nutt, who pledged several million to the effort, in return for a share of potential fees equalling Scruggs’s.

The Mississippi Medicaid case was set for trial in July, 1997. By then, the national mood had become sharply antitobacco, and the industry decided to buy peace. The case was settled for nearly four billion dollars, and was followed by settlements in Minnesota, Texas, and Florida. Four tobacco companies split the cost. The tobacco industry eventually reached settlements with the attorneys general in the remaining forty-six states. In all, the industry agreed to pay two hundred and forty-six billion dollars to the states over twenty-five years, in return for freedom from future state lawsuits. Scruggs’s fee over twenty-five years is estimated at close to a billion dollars.

Three days after the federal grand jury indicted Dickie and Zach Scruggs, along with their law partner, Sidney Backstrom, and two associates, the Scruggs family hosted one of the biggest social events of Oxford’s holiday season, a Christmas party attended by more than two hundred people. When guests arrived at the Scruggses’ home, they were greeted by Dickie and Diane as if nothing were amiss.

“They did a pretty good job of carrying it off,” one guest recalls. “Diane looked a little pained, but Dickie put his brave face on.” The guest list comprised the Oxford élite, who fully understood the game. “Everybody was very much aware, but nobody was talking about it,” one friend recalls. “Everybody was trying to make a point of dealing with other things.” By the end of the night, the party had achieved something like actual holiday gaiety.

Such evenings were a large part of the reason that Scruggs had moved to Oxford from Pascagoula, four years earlier. The town had changed drastically since Scruggs attended Ole Miss, when Oxford was a dull, provincial place known mostly for William Faulkner and the national ignominy of the integration riots. Students nicknamed it Oxpatch.

But as baby boomers prospered and began sending their children to Ole Miss, they bought apartments and built condos near campus for use during football weekends; the large pregame tailgate parties in the Grove came to feature barbecue suppers served on china with silver place settings. Sophisticated young chefs opened restaurants on Courthouse Square, which also began to attract high-end merchants. Richard Howorth, the current mayor, converted a former drugstore into Square Books, one of the country’s prized independent bookstores, which became the center of Oxford’s vibrant literary culture. Native writers such as Richard Ford, Barry Hannah, and John Grisham moved to town, and the flowering of Oxford paralleled the renaissance of Ole Miss under Khayat.

Both of the Scruggs children, Zach and Claire, attended Ole Miss, and Scruggs began to think of a new phase in his life, even retirement. In Oxford, he could assume the role of gentleman lawyer, and it seemed to fit him as neatly as the tailor-made suits he wore. He was unfailingly polite, and spoke with a courtly manner, even in casual encounters with strangers. “He thought it would be a great place to just semiretire, and start a practice,” Mike Moore says. “And I’m sure what he thought was that maybe one day he would get out of the practice and Zach would have a practice, maybe set Zach up, and do something new and different in a place where they could raise their family and it would really be nice.”

In 2003, Scruggs bought the upper floor of a building on Courthouse Square, across from the courthouse itself, and undertook a major renovation. Across the top of the building’s buff-colored exterior, in big block lettering, were placed the words “Scruggs Law Firm.” Office assistants tended to the chore of finding a parking space on the crowded square for Scruggs’s Porsche Cayenne. After the runway at the small local airfield was extended, it could accommodate his ten-seat Dassault Falcon 20. He and Diane bought a prime piece of property at the edge of campus, separated by a small forest from Faulkner’s home, Rowan Oak. The Scruggs place, a five-million-dollar white mansion with six columns across the front, gave them an address on a newly created street—Faulkner Woods Place.

To most of his colleagues in Oxford, Scruggs was a welcome addition. His generosity to the university benefitted all, and his building projects had increased local property values. Scruggs also had assumed the role of resident patron. He lent his plane to an acquaintance who wanted to attend the Betty Ford clinic, and to another who needed cancer surgery in Chicago. “Anybody—anybody—can go in and see Dickie, ask him for money, and come out with a check,” Moore says. “I mean, it’s really dumb, how he has done some of that.” Scruggs brought a certain élan to town, and politicians regularly came through Oxford on fund-raising quests (Joe Biden, Tom Daschle, Susan Collins, and Harry Reid among them). The federal charges against Scruggs were sensational, and troubling, but the prevailing view was probably best summed up by John Grisham, who remarked to the Wall Street Journal, “This doesn’t sound like the Dickie Scruggs that I know. . . . When you know Dickie, and how successful he has been, you could not believe he would be involved in such a boneheaded bribery scam that is not in the least bit sophisticated.”

The central figure in the alleged bribery conspiracy was not Dickie Scruggs, or his son, Zach, or even Backstrom, their law partner. It was a thirty-nine-year-old lawyer named Timothy Balducci, from the tiny town of New Albany, about forty miles east of Oxford. The government claimed that Scruggs had facilitated a conspiracy to bribe a local circuit-court judge, Henry Lackey, in the hope of getting a favorable ruling in a lawsuit over an attorney’s-fee dispute; but it was Balducci (who was not a party to that case) who approached Judge Lackey, promised him a payoff, and delivered the money to him. The indictment quoted Balducci boasting to Lackey, in a conversation that was obviously recorded, about how close he was to Scruggs. “My relationship with Dick is such that he and I can talk very private about these kinds of matters,” Balducci said. “He and I, um, how shall I say, for over the last five or six years there, there are bodies buried that, you know, that he and I know where [they] are.”

Balducci was an outsider in Scruggs’s Oxford social sphere, where it was assumed that he was a troubled person who had tried to exploit a peripheral relationship with Scruggs in order to buy leniency. The Scruggs defense lawyers soon advanced this notion themselves. “It’s a situation Tim Balducci did alone,” Tony Farese, Zach’s lawyer, said. “After he got apprehended, he decided to twist and turn things around and implicate others that were not involved.”

The day after those remarks were published, F.B.I. agents raided the law office of Joey Langston, Scruggs’s principal attorney. It was a stunning event, given the sanctity of attorney-client privilege. The raid was engineered by the lead prosecutor on the Scruggs case, Assistant U.S. Attorney Tom Dawson. Dawson’s office was sensitive to charges of Bush Justice Department politicization of recent public-corruption prosecutions, most notably the controversial conviction of Alabama’s Governor Don Siegelman, a Democrat, in 2006. Bill Clinton had cancelled his Oxford visit after the Scruggs indictment, and Dawson believed that he needed to make it clear that the case was about corruption, not politics.

Dawson’s means of achieving this aim was a provision in the Federal Rules of Evidence called Rule 404 (b), which allowed prosecutors to introduce evidence of other alleged crimes in order to demonstrate a defendant’s motive or criminal intent. It is a favorite device of Dawson’s (whose silver Chevy Tahoe, often parked on the square, bears the Mississippi license tag “404B”). Within a month of the raid on Joey Langston’s office, Langston was standing in federal court in Oxford, confessing to having participated in trying to corrupt another judge, on behalf of Scruggs.

As Dawson explained it to the judge, Langston had represented Scruggs a year earlier, in yet another dispute over attorney fees, in a court in Hinds County, where the state capital, Jackson, is situated. Langston, working with his then associate—none other than Timothy Balducci—and a former Mississippi state auditor, Steve Patterson, paid fifty thousand dollars to Ed Peters, a close friend of the Jackson judge, in the hope of influencing the outcome of the fee-dispute case. The judge—disregarding a special master’s recommendation that Scruggs owed the plaintiffs roughly fifteen million dollars—essentially ruled for Scruggs, saying that he owed the plaintiff nothing further. Langston pleaded guilty, and no one else has been charged. (Scruggs and Patterson deny any wrongdoing; Peters could not be reached.)

Many in Mississippi’s bar found this development even more disturbing than the original accusation against Scruggs. The Jackson judge who had allegedly been influenced was Bobby DeLaughter (Ole Miss Law, ’77), a Mississippi hero and a jurist uniformly regarded as thoughtful and honest. In the mid-nineteen-nineties, DeLaughter had resurrected the cold case against Byron De La Beckwith, who had twice been acquitted by Mississippi juries of the 1963 killing of the civil-rights activist Medgar Evers. (Alec Baldwin portrayed DeLaughter in the movie “Ghosts of Mississippi.”) According to the Langston plea colloquy, it wasn’t necessarily the money exchange that had allegedly influenced DeLaughter in the Scruggs case. DeLaughter was known to covet an appointment to the federal bench, and “based on this knowledge,” Dawson said, at the hearing, “Scruggs told Langston to let the judge know that if he ruled in his favor, he would pass his name along for consideration regarding the federal judgeship.” Everyone knew to whom the accusation was referring—Trent Lott.

The families of Lott, the Republican whip in the Senate, and Scruggs were close. Lott’s Thanksgiving gathering that year had taken place at Sub Rosa, an antebellum plantation near Pocahontas, Mississippi, which Patricia Lott had purchased in 2003. She bought the place with a $1.5-million loan from Diane Scruggs, who holds the deed on the property. Scruggs would have known that he could count on his brother-in-law to make a telephone call to DeLaughter, and Lott subsequently did call the Judge. (DeLaughter, whose service on the bench has been temporarily suspended pending an investigation, has denied any wrongdoing, as has Lott, who says that he customarily made calls regarding potential federal judgeships and never recommended DeLaughter.)

Two days before the Scruggs indictment, Lott announced his resignation from the U.S. Senate, in order to become a Washington-based lobbyist. (“There’s a time for everything and everything—a special time for everything under heaven,” he said.) In Oxford, the DeLaughter development, and Lott’s involvement, cast a new perspective on events. “Trent cited the Book of Ecclesiastes,” Curtis Wilkie, a professor at Ole Miss, and a friend of Scruggs, said. “But it was more like Revelations.”

In his war against the tobacco companies, Scruggs assembled a collection of lawyers, fixers, cutouts, and whistle-blowers, who joined him with the prospect of sharing in the payout. When the bonanza materialized, Scruggs was overwhelmed by claimants who believed that they had his warrant for a share. Mike Moore recalls, “He would say to me, ‘You know what I really feel like doing? I really feel like throwin’ all the money I’ve made in a big pile, and just calling everybody up and telling ’em, “Y’all come get what you think is yours, and just leave whatever you think is mine.” ’ ”

Scruggs had promised to distribute bits and pieces of the litigation’s proceeds as needs arose, sometimes so casually as to invite later dispute. He wanted legislation authorizing his hiring, an unlikely prospect in a state whose governor, Kirk Fordice, so opposed the tobacco litigation that he is said to have refused to endorse the check when Mississippi’s case was successfully settled. In 1994, Scruggs turned to Pete Johnson, a political blueblood (his uncle and his grandfather had been Mississippi governors) with deep connections in the legislature. Johnson says that Scruggs promised him ten per cent in any settlement if he could sway lawmakers toward the Scruggs position. A Medicaid bill was pending in conference, and Johnson had friends on the committee. Johnson, who was not a legislator, or even a registered lobbyist, wrote an amendment to the bill, giving Moore the authority to hire plaintiffs’ attorneys on a contingency basis. “I just made several phone calls and told them what I wanted to do, and they said, ‘Send us the amendments,’ ” Johnson recalls. “So I sent ’em, and they were inserted. And I did it with just a handful of words, artfully placed.”

After the settlement, Johnson wrote to Scruggs, suggesting that they meet to discuss Johnson’s payment. When Scruggs didn’t respond, Johnson drove down to Pascagoula, but Scruggs refused to see him. (Scruggs, through his attorney, disputes this account.) Johnson filed suit against Scruggs, but Scruggs had the case transferred to Pascagoula, where it was dismissed. Johnson could of course appeal, but he says that one day he received a call “out of the blue” from a man named P. L. Blake, urging him to drop the case. “He’s kind of a dealmaker, so to speak, that nobody ever sees,” Johnson says of Blake. “He’s a character. A Deep Throat kind of a guy.”

Blake had risen from a hardscrabble childhood in Webb, Mississippi. He played football at Mississippi State, and then in the Canadian Football League. When he returned to Mississippi, he made his way into the political sphere of the late Senator James Eastland, eventually parlaying his connections into substantial landholdings and various business ventures. In the nineteen-eighties, Blake had a series of financial and legal setbacks which resulted in bankruptcy and a bank-fraud conviction, but even then he was able to call upon powerful friends. One of his criminal lawyers was Fred Thompson, and he was represented in his bankruptcy proceedings by Dickie Scruggs, who made monthly loans to his bankrupt client, sometimes running to thousands of dollars; ultimately, the debt amounted to more than a million dollars.

According to Pete Johnson, Blake implored him to drop the Scruggs matter. Johnson was inclined to quit the suit anyway (he had received a liver transplant, and his prognosis was uncertain), and told Blake as much. “He wrote me a check for a hundred thousand dollars,” Johnson recalls. “I said, ‘Do you really want me to take this money?’ And he said, ‘Please. Please take it.’ And that was the last time I talked to him.”

Other Scruggs money fights were not as easily resolved. By 1994, as Scruggs was gearing up for the tobacco litigation, two of his former partners in the asbestos enterprise, Alwyn Luckey and William Roberts Wilson, had sued him, claiming that he had cheated them of their rightful share of fees. Scruggs fought the lawsuits, in a legal battle that lasted a dozen years, wending through several state and federal courts. An attorney for the plaintiffs, Charlie Merkel, deposed Scruggs five times over the years in an effort to determine how much Scruggs made on tobacco, how he spent it, and with whom he shared it. When Merkel pressed Scruggs as to why he had lent so much to a bankrupt client—P. L. Blake—without collateral, Scruggs replied, “He needed the money.” Scruggs was no more forthcoming about what Blake had done to earn a piece of the tobacco payment that could reach fifty million dollars. The tobacco litigation was a war, Scruggs explained, and he needed people like Blake, who had “his ear to the ground politically in this state and in the South generally.”

Friends of Scruggs say that the protracted disputes wore him down, and that his family wanted the matters settled. But Scruggs refused to surrender any unmerited tobacco money. “All the people who tried to get a piece of tobacco, he hated ’em,” an attorney who represented Scruggs in yet another lawsuit says. “He just despised ’em. I mean, he was not rational about them. I don’t think, I still don’t believe, that he would do anything illegal to beat ’em. But he would spend as much as it took to beat ’em, even if it would be smarter to settle it.” A judge eventually ordered Scruggs to pay seventeen million dollars to Luckey; the Wilson case landed in the Jackson courtroom of Judge Bobby DeLaughter.

After the tobacco settlement, Scruggs fell into a slump. He had more money than he could spend, and was fully stocked with yachts, planes, and vacation homes, but he ascribed to his brand of law a moral dimension (“It’s not often in life that you have a chance to make a mark on humanity,” he said after the tobacco victory), and looked for the next great crusade. It arrived on the morning of August 29, 2005, when Hurricane Katrina made landfall on the Mississippi coast.

Katrina’s peculiar ferocity was its surge, a mass of Gulf water nearly three stories high and six miles thick. Hurricane winds will smash things up, but water can level a whole community and carry it away. The Mississippi coast, accustomed to hurricanes, was unprepared for a surge like Katrina’s. More than two hundred people were killed there, but the storm also carried a second disaster. Much of the destruction of the coast was plainly caused by the surge, and standard homeowners’ insurance policies do not cover damage caused by flooding. The federal government offers flood insurance to property owners, but few property owners on the coast had the coverage. Many properties were destroyed, down to the concrete slabs, and it was almost impossible to determine whether the damage in these “slab cases,” as the insurance industry terms them, was caused by water or by wind or by both.

“The wind-and-water issue was just absolutely an unwinnable situation,” George Dale, who had been Mississippi’s insurance commissioner for thirty years when Katrina struck, says. “If there’s a regular hurricane that knocks things down, the insurance company comes in, pays what it owes, and people go back to their houses. But when there’s an issue of a water surge, or winds and water, there is no way to determine the per cent of that home or business that was destroyed by water.”

The insurance companies determined that most of the slab cases were water cases, and, thus, excluded from full coverage. In instances where structures were still standing but had been damaged by a combination of wind and water, property owners were granted only fractional relief.

The situation invited a Scruggs intervention, and he was on the coast almost as soon as the water subsided. His waterfront home in Pascagoula had been destroyed, as had Trent Lott’s. “This one was very personal to him,” Mike Moore says.

Scruggs set up a toll-free number and hired a bank of operators to handle the incoming calls. He had signed up Lott as a client, as well as the Democratic congressman Gene Taylor, who also lost his home to the storm, and Louis Guirola, Jr., a federal district judge. Scruggs was featured in a long article in the New York Times, in which he declared, “I’m not going to sit still for this. I’m going to bring every organizational and legal skill I possess to make these guys do the right thing under their policies.”

Scruggs announced that he would bring suit against the major insurance carriers on the coast, and he assembled a team, which he called the Scruggs Katrina Group. The core members of the group were mostly veterans of the tobacco battle, including David Nutt, who once again bankrolled the venture. A newcomer, brought into the group to develop legal theories and write briefs for litigation, was a Jackson lawyer named Johnny Jones.

To some in the group, Jones was a surprising choice. He had a small practice in Jackson, in an old house near the Capitol, with a casual atmosphere that reflected his style. With longish graying hair and the slight squint of a smoker, Jones was known, as one colleague put it, as “an artsy-craftsy sort of guy—and he writes, too.” He had little experience in mass torts, and none in the sort of undertaking in which he was now invited to participate. As a young lawyer in the mid-eighties, he had done some asbestos work with the master in the field, Danny Cupit, but he was deterred by the administrative nature of the work. When he saw all the money that Scruggs and the others were making at it, however, he promised his wife, Mary, and the younger partners in his firm that if the right chance came along he would take it. The Katrina project seemed right. “It was just an insurance-company bamboozle of Mississippians,” Jones says.

Jones had spent much of the previous year in close contact with Scruggs, defending him against the fee claims of Alwyn Luckey and Bob Wilson. Although Scruggs had been ordered to pay seventeen million dollars in back asbestos fees, Jones protected Scruggs’s tobacco money. When Scruggs asked him to be part of the Katrina group, Jones went to work on legal theories, figuring that four or five cases would need to be tried, and won, before the insurance companies would settle.

If things went as Scruggs hoped, Jones’s contribution would be the least important component of the Scruggs Katrina Group’s efforts. Within a few weeks of the storm, the Scruggs group had signed several hundred clients, and was actively pursuing whistle-blowers. By December, Scruggs was ready to test his clout. He went to see George Dale, the insurance commissioner, and his deputy, in Dale’s office in Jackson, and he was blunt. According to Dale, Scruggs said that there was a war coming between the insurance companies and the aggrieved people of the coast, and Dale needed to choose a side. “He proceeded to say, ‘Now, you know that they’re saying some bad things about you—they’re referring to you as the commissioner for insurance, rather than as the commissioner of insurance,’ ” Dale recalls.

Scruggs then laid out his strategy for going after State Farm, the state’s largest insurer. He would use the same strategy he had used with tobacco. Dale says, “He said, ‘You also know that I have all this inside information of all this wrongdoing that these insurance companies have done.’ And I said, ‘Well, Dickie, you ought to turn that over to the proper folks.’ ”

Dale says that Scruggs told him he’d already gathered some information showing that State Farm wasn’t playing straight with property owners. “And then he proceeded to say, ‘What I want you to do is, I want you to make State Farm put five hundred million in a fund, which I would administer, and I will pay the claims on the coast.’ To which my answer was ‘Dickie, I can’t do that.’ ” (Scruggs denies Dale’s account of the conversation.) The meeting ended, and Scruggs left. “And from that point forward,” according to Dale, “Dickie’s intent was to get rid of me as commissioner of insurance, at which he succeeded.” (During Dale’s Democratic-primary race last year, Scruggs took out a full-page newspaper advertisement depicting Dale as a pig, frolicking with insurance companies, under the headline “LIPSTICK ON A PIG.”)

Scruggs did obtain inside information about State Farm—volumes of it, delivered to him by Cori and Kerri Rigsby, sisters who were working as adjusters for a firm contracted by State Farm. The Rigsby sisters, who were stepdaughters of a former Scruggs client, claimed to have witnessed the firing by a State Farm manager of an engineering firm that had attributed storm damage to wind, rather than to water. The sisters, suspecting fraud, began to copy State Farm files, and, after meeting with Scruggs, started to deliver the purloined company material to him. After a large data delivery in June, 2006, the Rigsbys were fired by their firm, and hired by Scruggs as “consultants,” at an annual fee of a hundred and fifty thousand dollars each.

Scruggs copied the State Farm material and passed it on to Jim Hood, a protégé of Mike Moore’s who in 2003 had succeeded him as attorney general. Moore, who had entered private practice, was in close contact with the Scruggs Katrina Group, and was also directly advising Hood. Hood opened a criminal investigation into State Farm.

In August, 2006, the Scruggs group actually tried a case in court, winning a nominal victory—an additional payout of twelve hundred and twenty-eight dollars for a Scruggs client from the Nationwide insurance company. More important developments, however, were occurring outside court. Trent Lott and Gene Taylor, the Democratic congressman who had also lost his home in the storm, introduced amendments to the Homeland Security appropriations bill which would require investigations of the insurance industry. Charles Chamness, the C.E.O. of a national insurance trade association, has claimed that Lott had threatened him, in a telephone call, with “bringing down State Farm and the industry.” Lott also co-sponsored a proposal to strip the insurance industry of an antitrust exemption that had been in place since the nineteen-forties.

Meanwhile, the Rigsby sisters were featured in an ABC News exposé of Katrina insurance fraud, broadcast on the prime-time program “20/20.” Wearing State Farm windbreakers, the sisters told of doctored reports, shredded evidence, and widespread malfeasance on the part of State Farm. Cori Rigsby said, “Katrina was devastating, but so was State Farm.” (A judge ultimately disqualified them as witnesses.)

On November 14, 2006, in a teleconference with the other members of the group, Scruggs announced that State Farm had tentatively agreed to a settlement. The company would pay eighty-nine million dollars to settle the claims of the Scruggs group’s six hundred and forty clients, and $26.5 million in attorney’s fees. State Farm also agreed to settle a separate class action on behalf of other coast residents, Scruggs said, which could produce another ten million to twenty million dollars for the group. (That settlement was later rejected by a federal judge.)

Jones had not known about the Rigsby sisters, and he hadn’t been consulted in the negotiations with State Farm. He felt that his small firm had suffered without his services, and he had been ignored whenever he asked for an advance on potential earnings. He figured that if the fees were shared equally he and his firm would receive about four million dollars. A few weeks after the teleconference, according to Jones, Scruggs called him to discuss his split. “We’ve agreed to pay you a million dollars off the top,” Scruggs said. Jones says that he was delighted, assuming that Scruggs was advancing him a portion of his share to help him and his firm through the holidays. “I said, ‘O.K., that’s mighty nice, I appreciate that. How are we gonna split up the fees?’ And he said, ‘Well, that’s all you’re gonna get,’ ” Jones recalls. “And I said, ‘No, it’s not all I’m gonna get, Dickie.’ ” Jones wrote Scruggs a letter conveying his disagreement with Scruggs’s reckoning, the first of a months-long exchange of e-mails and letters aimed at resolving the dispute. Jones repeatedly urged that the group turn the issue over to arbitration, as provided for in the agreement, to no avail.

The settlement was finalized in January, 2007, and in March Jones and his partner, Steve Funderburg, were summoned to a meeting in David Nutt’s office, to resolve the fee dispute. They were told that the rest of the group had agreed to vote them out if they didn’t accept a six-per-cent share, which Jones calculated at $1.3 million.

Jones was despondent, and says that he thought of giving up the law. “I was too stupid to have seen it coming,” he says. “Who needs a lawyer like that?” Instead, Jones and Funderburg decided to sue Scruggs and the group. Jones recalls saying to himself, “I’m just gonna make sure that those guys that I trusted never practice law again as long as they live.”

Jones filed suit in Oxford, to maximize the embarrassment that the dispute could cause Scruggs. To represent him in the lawsuit, and to write the complaint against Scruggs, Jones hired Grady Tollison, who had been practicing in Oxford for decades. Until the arrival of Scruggs, whom some in the Oxford legal community considered “a coast lawyer,” Tollison had been the lawyer on the square. He had bought his building, a historic structure called the Thompson House, in 1973, with Robert Khayat, who was then a young law professor. Tollison referred to Scruggs’s new home as “the Taj Mahal,” and grumbled about “the jillion dollars’’ that Scruggs spent on the building that housed his firm. (Tollison’s mood was not improved when the Thompson House, across the square from Scruggs’s building, partly collapsed last year.) But Tollison’s objections to Scruggs represented something deeper. Tollison was a traditionalist, a former president of the state bar who delighted in the practice of law—the courtrooms and the juries, the legal gossip exchanged in early-morning bull sessions. “I know some trial lawyers who’ve tried hundreds of cases—they’re my friends,” he would say, making it clear what he thought of the “three-legged stool” approach to the law.

In his complaint for Jones, Tollison accused Scruggs and his Katrina cohort of conspiring to lure Jones into the venture in order to exploit his legal skills, only to freeze him out on fees. Tollison indicated that he meant to parade before the court the history of Scruggs’s money fights with his former associates, a spectacle to which Jones, who had defended Scruggs in just such a dispute, would be able to lend revealing insight. The Tollison filing charged Scruggs and his confederates with numerous infamies, and concluded, “A scheming cabal should not be allowed to succeed.”

The Jones complaint was filed on March 15, 2007, and was still the topic of discussion inside the Scruggs firm several days later, when Tim Balducci and his new law partner, Steve Patterson, paid a visit to the firm. The pair had become an increasingly familiar presence around the firm, a fact that would have surprised many of Scruggs’s old friends. As state auditor in 1992, Patterson had examined Moore’s hiring of Scruggs to represent the state in the asbestos litigation; Moore, in turn, ran Patterson out of office for a car-tag scam. Patterson was not a licensed attorney, yet he was now a full partner in the Patterson-Balducci firm.

Balducci was later lampooned as a Dickie Scruggs wannabe, and the bespectacled, wisecracking, ambitious lawyer might not have disputed that portrayal. He had practiced for a time with Scruggs’s ally Joey Langston—an association that introduced him to the world of big-money cases and the corporate-jet life style—but he left Langston at the end of 2006 to start his own firm, trying to create the impression of a politically connected practice in the Scruggs-Langston league. He brought in Patterson as a rainmaker, and persuaded several familiar names in Mississippi political and legal circles (including a former governor) to accept “of counsel” stipends, using them for letterhead adornment. Balducci and Patterson opened offices in New Albany, Oxford, and Washington, D.C., and set up an elaborate Web site that suggested the resources and talent of an established and prosperous firm. In fact, Balducci had big startup expenses and few paying clients, and what income he had came substantially from the odd jobs that Scruggs tossed his way.

Balducci knew that Jones had been squeezed out of the Scruggs Katrina Group, and hoped that he might be dealt in. When the subject of the Jones lawsuit came up during his visit to the Scruggs firm, and it was suggested that Balducci might be able to help, he was eager to volunteer his services. The case was to be heard by the circuit-court judge Henry Lackey, whom Balducci had often characterized as a mentor and close friend. Balducci said that he would have a word with the Judge on behalf of Scruggs’s position.

In Mississippi’s casual sociality, lawyers see judges on hunting trips and at cocktail parties, and sometimes visit them privately in chambers. Occasionally, talk turns to the subject of a case pending before the court. Such ex-parte communication—or “earwigging,” as it’s more commonly known—is a technical violation of ethics standards, but it is hardly rare, and is usually harmless. When Grady Tollison filed the Jones lawsuit, he bumped into Judge Lackey in the clerk’s office, and asked him to keep the case under seal for a few days, to give the parties a chance to settle; Lackey, who didn’t like lawyers airing their dirty laundry in fee disputes, agreed. Technically, Tollison should have filed a motion, to which the defendants would have had the chance to reply, but in all likelihood they wouldn’t have objected anyway.

Balducci wanted to influence a judge presiding over a case in which he had no role, but he did not set out to bribe Judge Lackey. Nor would he have had reason to think that Lackey would have countenanced an illegal overture.

Henry Lackey was a self-described “deep-water Baptist,” a deacon in his church, and a member of the state Commission on Judicial Performance. He lived in the small town where he was born, Calhoun City, where his parents had owned a Ben Franklin five-and-dime store. He made early-morning front-porch deliveries from his vegetable garden to the local widows. At seventy-two, he had a full head of white hair, and spoke in a slow, Sam Ervin voice. He answered his own phone, and drove around his circuit in a used GMC Yukon; Lackey was a firm conservative, but in his court an outspoken Democrat like Grady Tollison could count on a fair shake.

Lackey liked Tim Balducci, and he knew that his young friend was having a difficult time. When Balducci called and asked for a meeting with him to discuss a personal matter, Lackey was happy to oblige. On March 28th, Balducci met Lackey in his office, and told him that he thought the Scruggs side in the Jones case was the right one, and that if the Judge saw it that way, too, it would do Balducci some good. Later in the conversation, Balducci said that he knew the Judge meant to retire soon, and he hoped that Lackey would consider joining Patterson-Balducci on an of-counsel basis.

Lackey felt that the overture was grossly improper, possibly even criminal. He says that he agonized for nearly two weeks about the meeting, consulting another judge and a local prosecutor. He even discussed it with a former partner of Balducci’s, he says, “to see if I could discover what character flaw they had seen in me to think that I would participate in something like that.” He felt that he couldn’t take the matter to the attorney general, Jim Hood—“That would be like speaking to Mr. Scruggs himself”—and finally he decided to go to Assistant U.S. Attorney John Hailman, in Oxford, an old friend nearing retirement, who urged Lackey to play it out with Balducci. Lackey agreed to have his telephone and office wired for recording.

On May 4th, Balducci faxed Lackey a proposed order that would have sent the Jones case to arbitration. By this point, the Scruggs side would have been happy to have an arbitrator dispose of the Jones matter, an option that Jones says he requested more than twenty times before he filed suit. On May 21st, Lackey telephoned Balducci and said that he needed reassurance: “I just want to hear you say it again, I guess. You and Scruggs only one know anything about this?”

“Absolutely, Judge,” Balducci replied. “Absolutely. There is nobody in this world, ain’t but three folks in this world that know that I’ve even seen you. And it’s me and you and him. And that’s it.” Balducci went on to say that he didn’t want the Judge to do anything that made him uncomfortable.

Lackey asked whether Scruggs could be trusted. If he played along, Lackey wondered, might Scruggs try to hold it over him somehow? “He ain’t that way,” Balducci responded.

Calls and meetings between Balducci and the Judge continued through the summer. Balducci had broken the rules, and possibly the law, but he hadn’t explicitly tried to bribe Lackey. There was no indication, other than Balducci’s word, that Scruggs was directly involved. By September, Lackey had agreed to try to press the case another step forward—determining, in essence, to solicit a bribe.

In a conversation with Balducci on September 18th, Lackey haltingly broached the subject, until Balducci urged him to “put the corn on the ground.”

“If I help them,” the Judge asked, “would they help me?”

“I think no question that would happen,” Balducci replied. “Yes, sir. No question. Mm-hmm.”

Lackey told Balducci that he’d got himself into a fix, and he needed something “to just kinda help me over a little hump.” He couldn’t quite bring himself to ask for money until, in a conversation three days later, he said, “To get, to get me over a hump, I need forty.”

Lackey says that he hoped Balducci would turn him down. “I just hoped against hope that Tim would have said, ‘Judge, you misunderstood me, and I’m sorry, I didn’t mean to indicate that, and I was just wrong. You forget that, and I’ll go my merry way, and you have a good day,’ or something like that.”

Balducci replied, “Forty? O.K.”

Balducci was now involved in a bribery attempt, and what he did next drew the Scruggs firm into the crime. He decided to pay Lackey out of his firm’s “slush fund” (as Balducci termed it), but he needed assurance that he and Patterson would be repaid. Balducci says that he received that assurance from Sid Backstrom, at the Scruggs firm. (Backstrom denies this.) But Patterson wanted to be certain. He believed he knew how things really worked with Scruggs, so, he says, he got in touch with the mysterious P. L. Blake. According to Patterson’s account, he told Blake that he and Balducci had taken care of “a problem” for Scruggs (he didn’t say how) and that it had cost them forty thousand dollars; Blake met with Scruggs, and then reassured Patterson. (Scruggs denies that the meeting occurred; Blake could not be reached.)

Scruggs later issued a check to Balducci’s firm in the amount of forty thousand dollars, ostensibly as payment for legal work on a Katrina case.

On November 1st, Balducci drove to Calhoun City, and delivered the payment to the Judge. As he left Lackey’s office, he was confronted by F.B.I. agents. The agents produced a portable DVD player, and replayed for Balducci a video of himself making a payment to Judge Lackey. The agents then offered Balducci a choice: “You can go to Oxford, or you can go see Tom Dawson,” the Assistant U.S. Attorney. Balducci, a former public defender, knew that “Oxford” meant the detention center. He said he would see Tom Dawson.

The agents drove Balducci to the Ethridge Professional Building, down the hill from the federal courthouse, in Oxford, entering the building through a basement door so that they wouldn’t be seen. They escorted him to an interrogation room, where Dawson waited. Balducci was told that his life as he knew it was over. “The only question is, will you see your children graduate from high school?’’ Dawson said. Balducci did not hesitate. “What do you want me to do?”

Dawson asked Balducci if he would wear a body wire, and go back into the Scruggs firm. Balducci agreed.

The ruse was that Lackey had rewritten the arbitration order, and that Balducci wanted to have the Scruggs team read it before the Judge entered it. Less than three hours after being confronted by the F.B.I., Balducci climbed the steps to the Scruggs office, where he proceeded to give what one defense-team member conceded was “a dazzling performance.”

Balducci saw Dickie Scruggs almost as soon as he arrived, but Scruggs apologized and said he had to take a call. Balducci spent most of the next hour joshing with the firm’s secretaries, talking about the L.S.U.-Alabama game that weekend, and going over changes in the proposed order with Backstrom and Zach Scruggs. “Get it how you want it,” Balducci said, “ ’cause we’re paying for it to get it done right.”

Finally, Dickie appeared, and, after apologizing again, he brought Balducci into his office. Scruggs was excited about some satellite photographs he had of damaged homes on the coast—additional evidence, he was certain, of insurance-company liability. Balducci explained that he had a new order from Lackey, and that he wanted Scruggs to approve it. Scruggs looked it over. “That last sentence is not really a sentence,” he said. “I think he needs a colon there.”

Balducci then posed the question that would decide Scruggs’s fate. The Judge was feeling “a little more exposed on the facts,” Balducci said. Would Scruggs be willing to pay “ ’bout ten or so more?”

Scruggs’s secretary interrupted the conversation, to say that the governor of Delaware, Ruth Ann Minner, was on the line.

Scruggs said he would call her back.

“That’s fund-raisin’, it sounds like,” Balducci said.

“Shit,” Scruggs remarked. “Don’t know who that is.”

The two men returned to the critical question: “Do you want me to cover that, or not?” Balducci asked.

“I’ll take care of it,” Scruggs said.

On November 27th, Balducci told his story to the federal grand jury in Oxford. As that secret proceeding unfolded, two of Grady Tollison’s office workers stepped out to the balcony for a smoke, and noticed men wearing jackets and ties going in and out of the Scruggs firm, carrying boxes. It was an F.B.I. raid. The following day, the grand jury reported its indictment of Dickie and Zach Scruggs, their partner, Sid Backstrom, Steve Patterson, and Tim Balducci. That afternoon, Scruggs surrendered to the U.S. Marshals office, and was fingerprinted, and later arraigned. (He pleaded not guilty.) Tom Dawson had to recommend a bond, and was stumped—how do you set a bond amount for someone as rich as Scruggs? He decided to ask to have Scruggs’s jet grounded, and his request was granted. This became a minor issue a few days later, when the Scruggs legal team, led by John Keker, of San Francisco, pleaded with the court for permission to use the plane; the magistrate judge, S. Allan Alexander, a former partner of Grady Tollison’s, denied the request, issuing an order that included a recitation of commercial-airline fares between San Francisco and Memphis, seventy-five miles from Oxford.

It was clear to the Scruggs team that Balducci, who was arraigned separately, had become a government witness. Patterson made a plea bargain with the government, leaving only the Scruggs men and Backstrom as defendants.

On Friday, March 14th—just two weeks before the scheduled start of the trial—Scruggs arrived at the federal courthouse with Diane and his lawyer, Keker. Diane wept. Scruggs worked the room, greeting friends and colleagues, but the months after the indictment seemed to have diminished him, to a slight, almost wispy presence. Then Judge Neal Biggers entered, and announced that a plea deal had been made. Dawson read the charge that Scruggs agreed to plead guilty on—one count of conspiracy to bribe Judge Lackey—and, when Biggers asked Scruggs if he agreed with the prosecutor’s account, Scruggs seemed eager to offer a dissent. “I joined the conspiracy later in the game,” Scruggs said. “It’s not exactly as the prosecutor allocuted, in that there was no intent to bribe the judge; it was an intent to earwig the judge, Judge Lackey.”

Scruggs had to be prompted by his lawyer. “But then later—what about later?” Keker said. “You got to say something about later.”

“I did join the conspiracy after that,” Scruggs said. Backstrom pleaded to the same count. (The following week, Zach Scruggs entered a plea of guilty to the lesser offense of misprision of a felony.)

Upon leaving the courtroom, Dickie Scruggs began to prepare for his sentencing, which is likely to take place next month. He had his plane flown to Houston, where it was put up for sale. The Scruggs Law Firm was closed, and the big block lettering was taken down from the building on the square, leaving only the faint imprint of the firm’s name, traced by the sun, on the façade. Scruggs also wrote a letter to Chancellor Khayat, asking that his name be removed from Scruggs Hall.